README.md, before:

# Zsh Autocomplete Plugin

A high-performance hybrid Zsh+C autocomplete plugin with **trie-based prefix matching**, **ghost text completion**, and **persistent storage**. Features smart history navigation that filters commands by prefix and learns from your usage patterns.

## ✨ Features

- 🔮 **Ghost Text Completion**: Smart suggestions appear as you type
- 📚 **Prefix-Filtered History**: Navigate only commands matching your prefix
- 🌳 **Trie Data Structure**: Lightning-fast O(log n) prefix matching
- 💾 **Persistent Storage**: Commands cached between sessions
- ⚡ **High Performance**: C-powered processing with minimal overhead
- 🎯 **Smart Navigation**: Up/down arrows filter by current input

## 🏗️ Architecture

```
┌─────────────────┐    ┌──────────────────┐    ┌─────────────────┐
│   Zsh Plugin    │    │  C Autocomplete  │    │ Data Structures │
│                 │    │                  │    │                 │
│ • Key bindings  │◄──►│ • Trie matching  │────│ • Trie tree     │
│ • Ghost display │    │ • Prefix filter  │    │ • History cache │
│ • State mgmt    │    │ • Persistent I/O │    │ • File storage   │
└─────────────────┘    └──────────────────┘    └─────────────────┘
```

## 📁 Repository Structure

```
zsh_plugin/
├── src/                    # Source code
│   ├── autocomplete.c      # Main C program
│   ├── trie.c             # Trie implementation
│   └── priority_queue.c   # Priority queue (unused in current version)
├── include/               # Header files
│   ├── trie.h
│   └── priority_queue.h
├── scripts/              # Utility scripts
│   └── setup.sh         # Automatic installation
├── tests/               # Test scripts
│   └── simple_test.sh   # Basic functionality tests
├── docs/               # Documentation (if any)
├── data/              # Runtime data (created automatically)
│   └── trie_data.txt  # Persistent trie cache
├── plugin.zsh         # Zsh integration
├── Makefile          # Build system
└── README.md         # This file
```

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Automatic Installation (Recommended)
```bash
# Clone and install
git clone <repository-url> zsh_plugin
cd zsh_plugin
./scripts/setup.sh
```

### Manual Installation
```bash
# Build the system
make clean && make

# Add to your .zshrc
echo "source $(pwd)/plugin.zsh" >> ~/.zshrc

# Reload shell
source ~/.zshrc
```

## 💡 How It Works

### 1. **Prefix-Based History Navigation**
- Type any prefix (e.g., `git`)
- Press ↑/↓ to navigate only commands starting with `git`
- System remembers your current position in filtered results
- Return to original text by navigating past the filtered commands

### 2. **Ghost Text Completion**
- As you type, best matching command appears as suggestion
- Press → (right arrow) to accept the ghost text
- Based on frequency and recency of usage

### 3. **Persistent Learning**
- All commands stored in trie structure for fast retrieval
- Frequency tracking for better suggestions
- Data persisted to `data/trie_data.txt`
- No re-initialization between sessions

## 🎮 Usage Guide

### Basic Operations
- **Type**: Start typing any command prefix
- **↑ Arrow**: Navigate to previous command matching prefix
- **↓ Arrow**: Navigate to next command matching prefix  
- **→ Arrow**: Accept ghost text completion
- **Enter**: Execute command and update usage statistics

### Example Workflow
```bash
# Type a prefix
$ gi<cursor>

# Press ↑ to see filtered history
$ git status         # (from history)
$ git commit -m      # (press ↑ again)
$ git push           # (press ↑ again)

# Press ↓ to go back or navigate to original
$ gi<cursor>         # (back to original)
```

## 🧪 Testing

### Run Basic Tests
```bash
# Build and test
make test

# Run comprehensive tests
./tests/simple_test.sh
```

### Manual Testing
```bash
# Test ghost text
echo -e "git status\ngit commit" | ./autocomplete ghost "git"

# Test history navigation  
echo -e "ls -la\nps aux" | ./autocomplete history "l" "up" "0"

# Test usage update
echo -e "vim file.txt" | ./autocomplete update "" "vim file.txt"
```

## 🔧 Development

### Build Options
```bash
make          # Optimized build
make debug    # Debug build with symbols  
make clean    # Clean build artifacts
make rebuild  # Clean and rebuild
make test     # Run built-in tests
```

### Key Files to Understand
- **`src/autocomplete.c`**: Main program logic, persistent storage
- **`src/trie.c`**: Trie data structure implementation
- **`plugin.zsh`**: Zsh widget bindings and key handlers
- **`data/trie_data.txt`**: Persistent command cache

## 📊 Performance

### Benchmarks
- **Startup Time**: 0ms (uses cached data)
- **Ghost Text**: <5ms response for any prefix
- **History Filtering**: <10ms for 1000+ commands
- **Memory Usage**: ~1MB for 1000 commands
- **Storage**: ~50KB cache file for typical usage

### Scalability
- ✅ **Unlimited Commands**: Dynamic memory allocation
- ✅ **Fast Prefix Matching**: O(log n) trie lookups
- ✅ **Efficient Caching**: Only loads data once per session
- ✅ **Smart Filtering**: Only shows relevant commands

## 🔍 Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

**Plugin not loading?**
- Check that binary was built: `ls -la autocomplete`
- Verify plugin sourced: `grep "plugin.zsh" ~/.zshrc`
- Restart terminal: `source ~/.zshrc`

**Ghost text not appearing?**
- Type at least 2 characters for suggestions
- Check trie data exists: `ls -la data/trie_data.txt`
- Test manually: `echo "git status" | ./autocomplete ghost "git"`

**Arrow keys not working?**
- Check terminal compatibility: `echo $TERM`
- Test key codes: `cat -v` (press arrows to see codes)
- Try alternative bindings in `plugin.zsh`

**Performance issues?**
- Check cache file size: `du -h data/trie_data.txt`
- Clear cache: `rm -rf data/` (will rebuild on next use)
- Monitor with: `time ./autocomplete ghost "test"`

### Reset Everything
```bash
# Clean rebuild
make clean && make

# Clear persistent data
rm -rf data/

# Restart shell
source ~/.zshrc
```

## 🎯 Advanced Usage

### Custom Prefix Matching
The system filters history based on exact prefix matching. Commands starting with your typed prefix will appear in navigation.

### Persistent Data Management
- Commands automatically saved to `data/trie_data.txt`
- File grows over time with usage
- Automatic frequency tracking for better suggestions
- Safe to delete `data/` directory to reset

### Integration with Other Tools
```bash
# Export completion function
get_completion() {
    fc -l 1 | awk '{$1=""; print substr($0,2)}' | tail -r | \
    ./autocomplete ghost "$1" 2>/dev/null
}

# Use in scripts
SUGGESTION=$(get_completion "git")
echo "Suggested: $SUGGESTION"
```

## 🌟 Key Improvements

This version focuses on:
- **Simplified Architecture**: Removed priority queue complexity
- **Pure Trie Navigation**: Prefix-based filtering only
- **Persistent Storage**: No re-initialization overhead
- **Clean Repository Structure**: Organized directories
- **Robust Error Handling**: Graceful fallbacks
- **Performance Optimization**: Minimal memory usage

---

🚀 **Experience intelligent command completion that learns and adapts to your workflow with blazing-fast performance!**

Ready to supercharge your command line productivity!

## To Implement 
- Default bindings for left and right arrow keys for character and string navigation

Commit message:

feat(autocomplete): Improve Zsh autocomplete plugin
- Add colors to plugin.zsh
- Remove debug logs from autocomplete.c
- Update README.md with new features

README.md, after:

# Zsh Autocomplete Plugin

A high-performance hybrid Zsh+C autocomplete plugin with **trie-based prefix matching**, **ghost text completion**, and **persistent storage**. Features smart history navigation that filters commands by prefix and learns from your usage patterns.

## ✨ Features

- 🔮 **Ghost Text Completion**: Smart suggestions appear as you type
- 📚 **Prefix-Filtered History**: Navigate only commands matching your prefix
- 🌳 **Trie Data Structure**: Lightning-fast O(log n) prefix matching
- 💾 **Persistent Storage**: Commands cached between sessions
- ⚡ **High Performance**: C-powered processing with minimal overhead
- 🎯 **Smart Navigation**: Up/down arrows filter by current input

## 🏗️ Architecture

```
┌─────────────────┐    ┌──────────────────┐    ┌─────────────────┐
│   Zsh Plugin    │    │  C Autocomplete  │    │ Data Structures │
│                 │    │                  │    │                 │
│ • Key bindings  │◄──►│ • Trie matching  │────│ • Trie tree     │
│ • Ghost display │    │ • Prefix filter  │    │ • History cache │
│ • State mgmt    │    │ • Persistent I/O │    │ • File storage   │
└─────────────────┘    └──────────────────┘    └─────────────────┘
```

## 📁 Repository Structure

```
zsh_plugin/
├── src/                    # Source code
│   ├── autocomplete.c      # Main C program
│   ├── trie.c             # Trie implementation
│   └── priority_queue.c   # Priority queue (unused in current version)
├── include/               # Header files
│   ├── trie.h
│   └── priority_queue.h
├── scripts/              # Utility scripts
│   └── setup.sh         # Automatic installation
├── tests/               # Test scripts
│   └── simple_test.sh   # Basic functionality tests
├── docs/               # Documentation (if any)
├── data/              # Runtime data (created automatically)
│   └── trie_data.txt  # Persistent trie cache
├── plugin.zsh         # Zsh integration
├── Makefile          # Build system
└── README.md         # This file
```

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Automatic Installation (Recommended)
```bash
# Clone and install
git clone <repository-url> zsh_plugin
cd zsh_plugin
./scripts/setup.sh
```

### Manual Installation
```bash
# Build the system
make clean && make

# Add to your .zshrc
echo "source $(pwd)/plugin.zsh" >> ~/.zshrc

# Reload shell
source ~/.zshrc
```

## 💡 How It Works

### 1. **Prefix-Based History Navigation**
- Type any prefix (e.g., `git`)
- Press ↑/↓ to navigate only commands starting with `git`
- System remembers your current position in filtered results
- Return to original text by navigating past the filtered commands

### 2. **Ghost Text Completion**
- As you type, best matching command appears as suggestion
- Press → (right arrow) to accept the ghost text
- Based on frequency and recency of usage

### 3. **Persistent Learning**
- All commands stored in trie structure for fast retrieval
- Frequency tracking for better suggestions
- Data persisted to `data/trie_data.txt`
- No re-initialization between sessions

## 🎮 Usage Guide

### Basic Operations
- **Type**: Start typing any command prefix
- **↑ Arrow**: Navigate to previous command matching prefix
- **↓ Arrow**: Navigate to next command matching prefix  
- **→ Arrow**: Accept ghost text completion
- **Enter**: Execute command and update usage statistics

### Example Workflow
```bash
# Type a prefix
$ gi<cursor>

# Press ↑ to see filtered history
$ git status         # (from history)
$ git commit -m      # (press ↑ again)
$ git push           # (press ↑ again)

# Press ↓ to go back or navigate to original
$ gi<cursor>         # (back to original)
```

## 🧪 Testing

### Run Basic Tests
```bash
# Build and test
make test

# Run comprehensive tests
./tests/simple_test.sh
```

### Manual Testing
```bash
# Test ghost text
echo -e "git status\ngit commit" | ./autocomplete ghost "git"

# Test history navigation  
echo -e "ls -la\nps aux" | ./autocomplete history "l" "up" "0"

# Test usage update
echo -e "vim file.txt" | ./autocomplete update "" "vim file.txt"
```

## 🔧 Development

### Build Options
```bash
make          # Optimized build
make debug    # Debug build with symbols  
make clean    # Clean build artifacts
make rebuild  # Clean and rebuild
make test     # Run built-in tests
```

### Key Files to Understand
- **`src/autocomplete.c`**: Main program logic, persistent storage
- **`src/trie.c`**: Trie data structure implementation
- **`plugin.zsh`**: Zsh widget bindings and key handlers
- **`data/trie_data.txt`**: Persistent command cache

## 📊 Performance

### Benchmarks
- **Startup Time**: 0ms (uses cached data)
- **Ghost Text**: <5ms response for any prefix
- **History Filtering**: <10ms for 1000+ commands
- **Memory Usage**: ~1MB for 1000 commands
- **Storage**: ~50KB cache file for typical usage

### Scalability
- ✅ **Unlimited Commands**: Dynamic memory allocation
- ✅ **Fast Prefix Matching**: O(log n) trie lookups
- ✅ **Efficient Caching**: Only loads data once per session
- ✅ **Smart Filtering**: Only shows relevant commands

## 🔍 Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

**Plugin not loading?**
- Check that binary was built: `ls -la autocomplete`
- Verify plugin sourced: `grep "plugin.zsh" ~/.zshrc`
- Restart terminal: `source ~/.zshrc`

**Ghost text not appearing?**
- Type at least 2 characters for suggestions
- Check trie data exists: `ls -la data/trie_data.txt`
- Test manually: `echo "git status" | ./autocomplete ghost "git"`

**Arrow keys not working?**
- Check terminal compatibility: `echo $TERM`
- Test key codes: `cat -v` (press arrows to see codes)
- Try alternative bindings in `plugin.zsh`

**Performance issues?**
- Check cache file size: `du -h data/trie_data.txt`
- Clear cache: `rm -rf data/` (will rebuild on next use)
- Monitor with: `time ./autocomplete ghost "test"`

### Reset Everything
```bash
# Clean rebuild
make clean && make

# Clear persistent data
rm -rf data/

# Restart shell
source ~/.zshrc
```

## 🎯 Advanced Usage

### Custom Prefix Matching
The system filters history based on exact prefix matching. Commands starting with your typed prefix will appear in navigation.

### Persistent Data Management
- Commands automatically saved to `data/trie_data.txt`
- File grows over time with usage
- Automatic frequency tracking for better suggestions
- Safe to delete `data/` directory to reset

### Integration with Other Tools
```bash
# Export completion function
get_completion() {
    fc -l 1 | awk '{$1=""; print substr($0,2)}' | tail -r | \
    ./autocomplete ghost "$1" 2>/dev/null
}

# Use in scripts
SUGGESTION=$(get_completion "git")
echo "Suggested: $SUGGESTION"
```

## 🌟 Key Improvements

This version focuses on:
- **Simplified Architecture**: Removed priority queue complexity
- **Pure Trie Navigation**: Prefix-based filtering only
- **Persistent Storage**: No re-initialization overhead
- **Clean Repository Structure**: Organized directories
- **Robust Error Handling**: Graceful fallbacks
- **Performance Optimization**: Minimal memory usage

---

🚀 **Experience intelligent command completion that learns and adapts to your workflow with blazing-fast performance!**

Ready to supercharge your command line productivity!

## Need To Implement 
- Default bindings for left and right arrow keys for character and string navigation
- Commands with && functions should stay together when concatenating to the history
- Ghost text coloring
